



<div class="sidepanel">
              <!-- This is the div where all the popcorn action will hapen -->
              <div id="popcorn-container">
              </div>
            </div>

## Introduction
The recording above is an interview with a woman named Wally Funk. This oral history provided by Funk is one of the few surviving records of a clandestine space program which ran in the United States during the 1960s.[^first] Funk recalls her lifelong ambitions of reaching the sky and the opportunity she was given in 1961 by the Mercury program. Funk provides testimony of the sorts of experiments that were performed on the astronaut candidates as science pushed and tested the human body to its limits.[^second] In some of her other testimonies, Funk recalls the experiments as much more extreme than those she listed in this brief interview here <a href="#" onclick="javascript:seek(13)">(seek to 0:13</a>;<a href="#" onclick="javascript:seek(57)"> 0:57).</a> Funk also skims over the abrupt end to the space program, and the reason for its cancellation, and why, despite all of her accolades, (many which she never mentioned in this specific testimony) was she never accepted into NASA’s astronaut program, despite her persistence and her viability as a candidate <a href="#" onclick="javascript:seek(97)">(seek to 1:37)</a>.[^third]

The underpinning of Funk’s testimony is the history of trail-blazing aviatrix and aeronautic women from the time of the Second World War, through the space-race, and their very slow progress made until the present. This exclusive group of women that Funk was part of, as she says herself elsewhere, “had the right stuff”, just “not at the right time”.[^fourth] Behind this trailblazing history is one of handicap by an institutionally gender prejudiced sector which became so entrenched in the American consciousness that it became a fundamental reinforcement of gender roles and identity in the 60’s, which would not end until multiple decades later. Funk had her chance to go to space during the era of the Woman’s Liberation Movement, which had not yet made its full impact, but began to conjure promise for the future.[^fifth] Even so, Funk and the other women of the sky broke down barriers in the aeronautics sector before man had even reached space. The full affect this would not be felt until 1983, when the first American woman, Sally Rides went into space, and again in 1995, when the first American woman, Eileen Collins piloted a shuttle to space.[^sixth] Trailblazers like Funk played an important role in finally sending women to space, because, even though she never went to space herself, Funk never gave up. Her vocal testimony of what happened (constantly telling her story to journalists and news anchors) and continued, active role in aviation despite her failure, allowed Funk to show the multiple proceeding generations of young girls and women that if she could take control of her life, even in the face of defeat and adversity, that one day, they could do it to. Funk demonstrated to the next generation that not let defeat or the fear of failure stand in their way.[^seventh]  

## The Mercury 13
The Mercury program was developed during the era of the space race, specifically the years of 1960-61.[^seventh] This was a group of 6 women and 7 men, who were hand-picked by Dr. William Lovelace from the top of their fields to participate in tests to see if their bodies could withstand the stress of space.[^eighth] Although the program was privately funded (by fellow aviatrix Jackie Cochran who was deemed too old to participate in the studies) and not ‘officially’ a NASA certified program, the intention was that the Mercury group would be the first humans sent to space.[^fifth]

The men of the Mercury program were tested first by Dr. Lovelace and his team. One fateful day when he met Jerrie Cobb, Dr. Lovelace decided to put a theory to the test.[^fifth] Lovelace believed that women could not only be viable candidates for space travel, and that, they would one day need to go up to fill ‘pink-collar’ positions, but even more so, Dr. Lovelace believed that because of their stature, women could perhaps be even better candidates than men to send to space.[^ninth] He hypothesized that as long as their bodies could withstand the same physical tests he put the men through (including: drinking radioactive water, having frozen water injected into their ears, being put into isolation tanks, countless needles and probing, and more), <a href="#" onclick="javascript:seek(50)">(seek to 0:50)</a>[^second] women would take up less space physically, weigh less and therefore use less fuel, require less food than men and therefore require less to be sustained in space, and finally, with a smaller lung capacity, women would consume less oxygen.[^fifth][^third]

Dr. Lovelace put the Mercury women through all the same tests as the men, and just like Wally Funk had done, in many cases, the women performed better than the men in their tests <a href="#" onclick="javascript:seek(27)">(seek to 0:27</a>;<a href="#" onclick="javascript:seek(78)"> 1:18)</a>. The best remaining candidates, including Wally Funk were due to go through a second stage of testing when Russia won the space race by sending the first man to space.[^seventh] President Eisenhower declared it an absolute priority for the United States to send the first man to mars, and this became NASA’s preoccupation until the eventual success of the Apollo Mission.[^fifth] While the Mercury men continued on to work for NASA, the women’s program was immediately cancelled. When founders Jerrie Cobb and Jackie Cochran tried to find out why, they hit a bureaucratic wall with a lack of official records and sanctions by NASA.[^fifth][^first]

## The Fight for Equality
While Wally Funk moved on with her life <a href="#" onclick="javascript:seek(92)">(seek to 1:32)</a>, Cobb and Cochran decided to propel the program’s dismissal into the eye of the public, and took NASA’s decision to terminate the program to court on the grounds of gender discrimination.[^fifth] It became clear by the comments made at the hearing that it was in fact because they were women that the program was cancelled. Comments such as:

* “As my friend Bob Gilruth says, we’re reserving 110 pounds of payload for recreational equipment”, Robert Gilruth being the director of NASA's Manned Spaceflight Center,[^ninth]
*  “As for the ladies’ alleged ability to withstand boredom and confinement better than the man, I think there might be a number of harried husbands who have sat through long
evenings listening to the wife’s recitations of the day’s activities, who have credentials in the area of tolerance and boredom”, stated by a NASA psychologist, [^ninth]
* “I think this gets back to the way our social order is organized really. It is just a fact. The men go off and fight the wars and fly the airplanes and come back and help design and build and test them. The fact that women are not in this field is a fact of our social order. It may be undesirable.", according to John Glenn, the first American to orbit the earth [^fifth]
*   "[he asks that] every scientist, every engineer, every serviceman, every technician, contractor, and civil servant gives his personal pledge that this nation will move forward, with the full speed of freedom, in the exciting adventure of space", said Kennedy in an address to NASA. [^eleventh]

Despite the obvious prejudice, the ‘official’ ruling was that the program was not further pursued because the women did not have the necessary engineering degrees or military background newly required by NASA of their astronauts and pilots, as mandated by President Eisenhower.[^ninth][^second] The irony of the circumstance was that, at the time, women were not welcomed in such programs, and therefore, all women were completely incapable of receiving the necessary training and gaining the necessary experience.[^tenth] Wally Funk herself tried, but was rejected from entering the engineering program because the building facilities did not have a woman’s washroom.


## Gender Identity in Post-War America
Today, it is argued by academics, journalists, and the Mercury 13 women themselves (including Wally Funk), that the sky had perpetually been an “old-boys club”, steeped in military history and gender prejudice.[^fifth][^second] At the time around the Second World War, aviation was an entirely male field which was beginning to be broken into by aviatrix women like Funk and Cobb. Now, the limits of the sky were set to space, and the stakes were higher than ever. It is argued by Sage that because NASA was staffed by the American military, NASA employees had brought war-time attitudes of space - as man’s place on the front line - and women’s place - back at the home front - along with them to their NASA positions, thereby directly translating and perpetuating wartime attitudes into a new circumstance.[^fifth][^eleventh]

According to Sage, the role of space exploration quickly became rooted in American consciousness as a defining image of gender identity. When NASA presented their first male astronauts to the public (The Mercury 13 men), they took absorbed into the same hyper-masculine image which was mistakenly associated with the frontier of the “wild west”, and now, of space.[^twelfth] A publication by Life Magazine cemented this gender binary, according to Sage, when it ran their two-piece astronaut issue. The first issue detailed the epic space journey of the Mercury men upon their (eventual) return from space, while the second issue detailed the emotional stress experienced by their picture-perfect wives back at home.[^thirteenth]

## Trailblazing Women of the Sky

Again, in 1963, Russia beat the United States in another milestone in the space-race, when they sent Valentine Tereshkova, the first woman to space.[^seventh] It took until 1983 for NASA to finally send a woman, and until 1995 for a NASA woman to pilot a mission to space. When her day to fly to space finally arrived, Eileen Collins invited the women of the Mercury 13 to send her off, and decided to dedicate her maiden voyage to the trailblazing women like Wally Funk who led the way ahead of her.[^fourteenth]

Her NASA defeat was far from the end of Wally’s story though. Funk had become at the age of 21 the first female flight instructor of US Army Officers at the Oklahoma military base.[^tenth] Later, she became the first woman to occupy the position of Accident Investigator for the National Transportation Safety Board.[^third] While she has not make it to space herself yet, Wally Funk continued to break barriers and inspire the multiple proceeding generations of women to pursue their dreams and to take control of their own lives <a href="#" onclick="javascript:seek(131)">(seek to 2:11)</a>.[^seventh][^tenth]

## The Future of Funk
An important part of this story of eliminating prejudice in travel to space is the current circumstance of Wally Funk’s story. Funk bought a ticket to go into space orbit with Richard Branson’s (founder of the Virgin group) Virgin Galactic commercial spaceflight <a href="#" onclick="javascript:seek(204)">(seek to 3:24)</a>. The only criteria that will soon stand in the way of access to space will be a $250, 000 ticket.[^fifteenth] It is anticipated that in the years to come, prices will drop, and the technology will improve, and eventually space travel will become an attainable dream for nearly anyone.[^sixteenth]

## Why Wally?

Although the proceedings of the Mercury program left no officially sanctioned paper-trail, we know about its existence today because the continual testimony by Wally Funk who has constantly dragged her story back out into the light, and forced the NASA of today to face their sexist past. Wally’s testimony keeps this important part of NASA, women’s, and space-race military history alive. Wally still goes around telling her story to anyone who will listen.

While it is not possible to go back and ask Wally Funk more questions about this history of women’s space travel and answer any remaining questions, and the interviewer may have focused on particular aspects I would not have myself, this oral history interview and its accompanying technical accompaniment crafts a different kind of history from Wally’s words - a much more personal, relatable, and accessible past. It places the emphasis on the human experience rather than detailing a narrative about detached and abstract processes. This humanizing medium of history therefore brings the past into the present and allows us to interact with it, and manipulate it to tell the narrative we want it to express, while allowing Wally to do the same.

[^first]: <a href="http://www.hawaiinewsnow.com/story/37634261/pioneer-pilot-wally-funk-honored-at-pacific-aviation-museum">Lee, Grace.</a> “Pioneer pilot Wally Funk honoured at Pacific Aviation Museum.” Hawaii News Now. Friday March 2, 2018.
[^second]: <a href="https://www.theguardian.com/world/2002/apr/02/gender.uk">Krum, Sharon.</a> “Space cowgirl.” The Guardian. Tuesday April 2, 2002.
[^third]: <a href="https://news.nationalgeographic.com/news/2003/07/0709_030709_tvspacewoman.html">Burbank, Sam.</a> “Mercury 13’s Wally Funk Fights for Her Place in Space.” National Geographic News. July 9, 2003.  
[^fourth]: <a href="https://www.popsci.com/why-did-mercury-13-astronauts-never-fly-in-space">Teitel, Amy.</a> “Why Did the Mercury 13 Astronauts Never Fly in Space?” Popular Science. July 17, 2016.; <a href="https://www.cbsnews.com/news/pioneer-pilot-led-the-way-for-american-women-in-space/">Miller, Michelle.</a> “Pinoeer pilot led the way for American women in space.” CBS News. June 12, 2013.; <a href="http://www.bbc.com/news/science-environment-36824898">Nelson, Sue.</a> “The Mercury 13: Women with the ‘right stuff’.” BBC News. July 19, 2016.
[^fifth]: Teitel, Amy. 2016.
[^sixth]: <a href="https://search-proquest-com.myaccess.library.utoronto.ca/docview/231210451?pq-origsite=summon">Melroy, Pamela.</a> “Women in Space.” Minerva’s Bulletin Board, vol. 8(2): 1995, Pasadena.; <a href="http://www.mercury13.com/background.htm">Hallonquist, Al.</a> “Mercury 13 – the women of the Mercury Era: Background.” 2012, Mercury13.com.
[^seventh]: Hallonquist, Al. 2012.
[^eighth]: <a href="https://www.ninety-nines.org/mercury13.htm">Funk, Wally.</a> “The Mercury 13 Story.” The Ninety-Nines, 2009.
[^ninth]: <a href="https://www.theatlantic.com/science/archive/2017/03/women-in-space/498833/">Koren, Marina.</a> “Why Women Weren't Allowed to Be Astronauts.” The Atlantic, March 10, 2017.
[^tenth]: Nelson, Sue. 2016.
[^eleventh]: <a href="https://journals-scholarsportal-info.myaccess.library.utoronto.ca/details/00380261/v57is1/146_glafsnatpog.xml">Sage, Daniel.</a> “Giant leaps and forgotten steps: NASA and the performance of gender.” The Sociological Review, vol. 57(1): 2009, pp. 150-153.
[^twelfth]: Sage, Daniel. 2009, 160.
[^thirteenth]: Sage, Daniel. 2009, 148-153.
[^fourteenth]: Melroy, Pamela. 1995.; Miller, Michelle, 2013.
[^fifteenth]: <a href="https://www.cnbc.com/2018/01/12/richard-branson-reveals-that-hes-excited-for-virgin-galactic-in-2018.html">Umoh, Ruth.</a> “Billionaire Richard Branson reveals what he's most excited about for 2018.” CNBC, January 12, 2018.
[^sixteenth]: <a href="https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/apr/10/virgin-galactic-richard-branson-interview">Anthony, Andrew.</a> “Richard Branson: ‘Millions of people would love to become astronauts’.” The Guardian, April 10, 2016.
