## Introduction to the HumSci Interface
The project proposed herein is the creation of a multi-disciplinary, collaborative interface and work environment. The interface will combine predominantly the work of archaeologists, ethnographers, historians, oral historians, and GIS specialists. Ideally, the end product will be an international interface to which multiple universities, institutions, and freelancing students and professionals contribute. The interface will be highly visual and aural, and the flow of information is anticipated to be navigated similarly to a <a href="http://www.chronicle.com/img/photos/biz/blogPost/profhacker/2009/08/prezi-menu.png">prezi presentation</a>.
Conceptually, the interface will start with a geographical region, to which layers of information regarding archaeological/historical/heritage sites are added. To each site, layers of information relating to individual features and artifacts are be added. From there, each artifact or feature is connected to data principally regarding:

* Photographs
* 3D imaging
* GIS Displays
* Site Reports
* Raw Data
* Analyses
* Related Oral Histories (as well as audio files)
* Related Ethnographic Data (as well as audio files)
* Related Historical Data and Documents
* Related Secondary Publications
* Research Currently Underway
* Interface Content Currently Under Construction
* Other Related Artifacts/Features
* Other Related Sites

Smaller projects similar to this are already underway. For example, some archaeological sites such as <a href="http://paulrduffy.com/?page_id=53">Tarhos 26</a> utilize online databases which store coded ceramic typological data (processing of which is already underway at the University of Toronto) in order to promote international collaboration between archaeologists. Similarly, institutions in the heritage and museum sectors such as <a href="http://collections.rom.on.ca/?_ga=2.111309444.183391490.1522558121-245781122.1520088268">the ROM</a> already benefit from online exhibit catalogues. Furthermore, archival websites such as archive.org are already enabling the mass sharing of scanned archived documents.

The intention of the interface it to make its information publicly accessible, while alterations and additions to it will be restricted to professionals, as well as authorized and supervised students and volunteers. For example, historians can add their own related historical documents, and ethnographers or oral historians can add their own related collections of audio files, while students and volunteers will pick up the slack of adding and updating content where professionals fail to contribute.

The project proposed herein is a direct response to address issues related to disciplinary studies of the human past. It is first and foremost an experiment in the large scale collaboration of social sciences and humanities in the study of the human past. Aside from getting academics out of the dirt, the lab, and the archives, and providing students exceptional experience, the interface confronts decades of intra- and inter-disciplinary problems with a lack of publication and information sharing. Moreover, it seeks to address problems related to storage shortages, analytical backlog, the impermanence and vulnerability of culture, and especially material culture, and issues of access, preservation, and ownership related to geography and/or geopolitics.

Aside from all of these anticipated disciplinary benefits, the proposed interface will allow for an entirely new way of studying the human past. With each layer of information we add onto an item, whether it be an entire region or a specific artifact, we add more context, and therefore significance. Compiling all this data in one place will allow us to see the obvious meaning which would have otherwise been missed had we not for example, considered oral history. Meanwhile, this will prompt professionals and students alike to look at their data differently, force them to constantly orient it within its greater implications, and hopefully prompt new ideas and practices. Furthermore, such a glaringly transparent interface which tracks and records the past and present work of individuals, the contributions they made/make and the conclusions that they drew/draw, allows for a critical self-reflection on our disciplinary practices. Once the interface is established, we can analyze trends in the kinds of conclusions that are being made, what themes are being explored, what kinds of analyses are being conducted, and what types of research are being ignored or overloaded, and as such, examine them for systemic bias and make the necessary adjustments.

## HumSci Methods

Tools and Dissemination
In the creation of the interface, nearly every kind of medium imaginable would be utilized, from images, galleries, maps,audio files, and displays of articles, to GIS, manipulatable 3D images, to VR Display and 3D printing information. This interface would behave as both a tool for, as well as the vehicle for dissemination of, research. The implementation of this project would require some substantial technical set-up which would also work as flexible and user friendly as possible. Undergraduate students and academics would need to be able to easily add to and alter the interface in order to maintain a collaborative, and at times outsourced, work flow.

Challenges
Some anticipated challenges stem from the nature of the involved disciplines, while the others from the nature of digital information applications. The most significant hurdles would be the level of sophistication of some of the integrated data, as well as the sheer mass of data. Some technical experts would absolutely necessary to establish the VR, 3D and integrated GIS applications and to run their associated equipments (e.g. 3D printer). Potentially, participating universities could offer the project teams of graduate students from their other technical departments (should they have them). Otherwise, a handful of full-time technical support personnel would need to be employed. Additionally, archaeological/historical/heritage sites can produce upwards of hundreds of thousands of artifacts, features, ecofacts etc. This requires that the code infrastructure be highly organized and well executed. It would also need to be flexible in order to account for first, the variation in types of information, and second, the fact that not all artifacts or sites will have relevant associated historical documents, or ethnographical documents, or archaeological reports. The interface itself would need to be able to filter the layers of associated data shown at a given time in order to account for this variability in information, which would no doubt required some complex javascript for loops.

Unlike most cases of digital history, this interface will allow for its information to be elevated. Particularly, important contextual information that would otherwise be lost when reduced into coded data, would instead be reestablished in the interface’s ability to combine ethnographic, historical, GIS and more kinds of analyses all within one convenient space.

With all of this information being easily accessible in one place, there is the potential that future work may be influenced by the information of what type of work or region is the most popular, what kinds of analyses have already been done, and what kinds of conclusions have already been drawn. However, rather than setting people along the same course, access to this sort of knowledge has the potential to set people on alternative courses of investigation and instead improve the breadth of our records.

Finally, complications may arise from filtering data. While absolutely necessary to the interface’s utility, filtering may allow for some information to slip through the cracks. For example, the difference between a groundbreaking discovery could be a ceramic sherd that was improperly coded by an undergraduate as burnished during typological analyses, or who inputted the sherd’s data incorrectly into the interface. As such, strong instruction and supervision will be required throughout the project to ensure mistakes such as these are not made.

## HumSci Projected Timeline

In order to compile the necessary basic data for a single archaeological/historical/heritage artifact would likely take a couple of months. An entire site potentially years (depending on how much data is associated with it). The additional work with VR, HD, GIS and 3D imaging displays would likely add another few years. The benefit to this interface, and the entire point however, is that multiple projects could be built at once, and would be contributed significantly by/outsourced to the academics/professionals as they  Conduct and complete their work. While the data infrastructure may initially take time to established, once established, it has the potential to revolutionize our work, providing more information, faster, to work with. To be successful then, this project will need to be long term and contributed to ongoing. A trial period with a single, small site, would be optimal in order to work out any remaining kinks  before official launch.
Logistically, half of the work conducted for this interface would be done regardless. For example, archaeologists already process and code artifacts from a site, and some are even already being entered into global databases. Archaeological analyses already require GIS work. Ethnographers already have established collections of their observances and interviews, much like oral historians already have collections of their interviews, historians have collections of primary documents. Each academic can simply add their own work to the site as it is completed. Other academics who use e.g. a specific artifact in their secondary work can then add their completed work to the interface and so on. Undergraduate and graduate students can take on the remaining workload, for example, adding already completed work, coding new artifacts, going back and digitizing artifacts and so on. At the university of Toronto, we already have a system established for undergraduate and graduate students to participate in these projects. Moreover, many heritage and museum websites have online exhibits less sophisticated, but conceptually similar to what we are trying to achieve. As such, it would take little *extra* manpower to achieve this goal. We simply have to integrate it into already working systems.

## The Importance of HumSci
As previously mentioned, this interface address a number of critical disciplinary problems. To begin with, this interface will publicly track the projects being done and articles being published. As such, the interface will allow for both the public and professionals to hold researchers accountable to a) publish their research and b) share it with both the public and their colleagues in a timely manner. The interface therefore provides the opportunity for ground-breaking inter- and intra-disciplinary collaboration. Students and professionals alike will work towards something bigger than each individual person or discipline, and work beyond the artificial disciplinary boundaries (i.e., distinctions of “archaeologist”, “historian”, “ethnographer”) which exist between all those who study human culture and behaviour. Moreover, the interface will make the fruits of that collaborative labour accessible to the public, because history is for all mankind.

Within the archaeological and heritage disciplines specifically, we are experiencing a mounting crisis known as “the storage crisis”, for obvious reasons, and which includes a significant backlog of analyses. At the heart of both these problems are a) there is not enough room to store all of these artefacts for the next 100 generations (try as we might), and b) there are often significantly more artefacts on a given project than there are trained professionals to analyze them. This interface project addresses both of these crises. We may not be able to physically store and preserve every single artefact from every single site for multiple generations to come, but we can conduct as many analyses on them as possible, and take 3D scans of them so that future generations can at least reproduce them if necessary, while physically preserving a few artifacts for future generations to test new and better methods on. Moreover, the interface addresses the analysis backlog twofold. The promotion of, participation in, and funding for this project will provide incentive for more students and professionals to contribute their time. Meanwhile, a collection of sherds sitting in the basement at the University of Toronto because our lab teams are too preoccupied with a groundbreaking discovery, will no longer mean that work stops. Typological artifact analyses and coding can be outsourced, for example, to a university in Arizona with less work on their plates, thanks to the interface’s sophisticated imaging technology. So long as the images are captured of the collections as they are each given an ID, cleaned, and put into storage, the burden of work can be shared just as much as the information is.

Next, an obvious obstacle to the preservation of material culture and physical documents and recordings is their nature to decay over time. Additionally, preservation of certain material culture can be emotionally and spiritually injurious to some cultures (e.g., the Hopi and Zuni), despite our good intentions. Moreover, because these are the very objects form which national pride and identity are so frequently amassed, they have historically been directly targeted as prisoners and casualties of various wars and conflicts. A famous example of this would be the collection of the museum collections of conquered nations by the Nazis. More recently and distressingly, ISIS/ISIL has targeted and pillaged countless sites and warehouses in the middle east to profit off of black market sales of material culture while damaging heritage. Exceeding this, ISIS/ISIL has intentionally destroyed dozens of sites, and even murdered a Syrian archaeologist for defending their location. The impermanence of material culture (artefacts, features, sites, etc.) is what makes them vulnerable and such easy targets. The sophisticated image capturing and reproduction information that this interface will utilize negates the crisis of each of these problems from occurring ever again. It cannot, however, keep physical culture from decaying. So long as the interface data survives, there will be no need to fight the passage of time, to offend or even harm the very people we study, nor die to prevent the loss heritage.

Finally, research is often restrained by issues of geography and geopolitics. To being with, typical research necessitates the journey to the (often distant) region of interest in order, for example, to view a particular artifact or document which can’t leave its national border, or to view a site or feature so monumental and/or fragile that it cannot be moved. Next, when a region falls under conflict, whether it be internal or external, research in the region tends to experience a hiatus until resolved. Additionally, geopolitics tend to create even more obstacles to research. For example, a Jewish archaeologist is unable to visit Palestine to practice or even witness a single artefact. Similarly, national pride and geopolitical conflicts often arise over conflicts of heritage ownership. The proposed interface will bridge geographical distance, and erase geopolitical obstacles. The ability of the interface to examine documents, objects and features in high resolution, 3D, and even VR imaging, as well as the ability to physically print a 3D model copy, means that geographical distance and national borders should never again be an obstacle to the progress of research. Moreover, the interface begins to significantly tackle the issue of heritage ownership. While it would not rectify, for example, the Dead Sea Scroll Conflict, it would allow for institutions such as the British Museum to relinquish ownership of their many controversial items, e.g. the Parthenon marbles, without losing the ability to study and enjoy them.

## HumSci Budget Proposal

|  **Digital History Initiative Grants** |  |
|  :------: | ------ |
|  **Proposal for III. Large Grant** |  |
|  **5 Year Trial Period at the University of Toronto** |  |
|   |  |
|  **Salaries and Wages** | **Dollar Amount/5 Years** |
|  Academic/Faculty personnel | 425000 |
|  Research assistants | 212500 |
|  Data managers or analysts | 212500 |
|  Computer programmer/Technician | 58240 |
|  **Equipment** |  |
|  Equipment | 110000 |
|  Equipment installation/set-up | 2000 |
|  Technical Servicing  | 5000 |
|  **Other Services & Expenses** |  |
|  Computer use/data storage | 18780 |
|  Photographic/graphic services | 50000 |
|  Translation/interpretation | 29120 |
|  Teleconferencing/videoconferencing | 500 |
|  Promotion and dissemination  | 2500 |
|  **Total** | 1126140 |
